# Quick tour

To setup RedBeanPHP for testing purposes, just use:

```php
require 'rb.php';
R::setup();
```

This will create a **temporary database** in the temporary folder on most systems. If this fails; try passing
a valid [DSN, username and password (PDO style)](/setup "Setting up RedBeanPHP").

## CRUD

RedBeanPHP allows you to perform
<abbr title="C.R.U.D. stands for CREATE, RETRIEVE, UPDATE, DELETE.">CRUD</abbr> operations quite easily. After setting up you don't have to add tables, columns, indexes or
foreign keys. All database structures will be generated by RedBeanPHP.

Instead of database records, RedBeanPHP thinks in _'Beans'_.
A bean always has a type and an id. The type matches the name of the table where the bean is stored.
This is how you create a bean:

```php
$shop = R::dispense('shop');
```

And this is how you set properties:

```php
$shop->name = 'Antiques';
```

This is how you **store** the shop in the database:

```php
$id = R::store($shop);
```

This is how you **load** your previously stored shop:

```php
$shop = R::load('shop',$id);
```

And this is how you **delete** the shop from the database:

```php
R::trash($shop);
```

## Relations

<abbr title="Object Relational Mapping">ORM</abbr> is about mapping relations. Our shop would be quite useless if it
does not sell anything, so our shop is filled with $products, **those are beans as well**.
This is how you **add** a product to your shop:

```php
$product = R::dispense('product');
$product->price = 50;
$shop->ownProduct[] = $product;
R::store($shop);
```

Simply add products to a list called ownProduct. If you add employees use:

```php
$shop->ownEmployee[] = $mike;
```

The name of the list should always begin with the word **'own'** followed by the
name of the **type** of bean it contains. Remember, the type is the string you pass to the
**R::dispense()** method! So, beans of type 'book' are stored in **ownBook**,
beans of type 'employee'
in **ownEmployee**, beans of type 'box' in **ownBox** etc. To empty a list:

```php
$shop->ownEmployee = array(); //fires everyone!
```

You never have to load a list. Lists are fetched as soon as you access the
property. This is called **lazy loading**. You can also mix in some <abbr title="Structured Query Language">SQL</abbr>;
for instance to **sort** the products in a list:

```php
$products = $shop
	->with(' ORDER BY price ASC ')
	->ownProduct; //since 3.3
```

Learn more about [one-to-many relations](/adding_lists "1-N relations") in RedBeanPHP.

## Shared Lists

A shared list is just like an own-list but the relationship goes **both ways**.
With an own-list the shop 'owns' the products. They cannot be owned by
more than just **one** shop. With managers, this is not the case; managers
can be associated with **many** shops. So we use a
[shared list](/shared_lists "many-to-many relations in RedBeanPHP") (creates a
**link table** manager_shop):

```php
$shop->sharedManager[] = $jack;
```

## Finding stuff

To [find](/finding_beans "Finding beans in the database")
beans in the database, we use _plain old SQL_, for instance the following example
will find all shops in the neighbourhood:

```php
$shops = R::find('shop',' distance < 10 ');
```

## Querying

Using raw [SQL power](/queries "Querying") is possible as well, and just as easy:

```php
R::exec('UPDATE shop SET name = ? ',array('MyShop'));
```

RedBeanPHP offers methods to retrieve cells,columns,rows and multi dimensional arrays:

```php
R::getCell( ... )
R::getCol( ... )
R::getRow( ... )
R::getAll( ... )
```

## After Development

Once you are done developing you need to deploy your PHP application on a
production server. Now you don't want RedBeanPHP to scan the database and
modify the schema there, so you need to tell RedBeanPHP to [freeze](/freeze "Freezing the beans!"):

```php
R::freeze( true );
```

Simply put that line _at the beginning of your application_ before deploying.
Right **after** R::setup( ... ).

## Don't like static methods?

RedBeanPHP provides a lot of easy-to-use static methods. If you don't like
this you can use the same methods on the objects behind the facade as well.
Learn how to use the RedBeanPHP [core objects](/internals#objects "Learn how to use objects instead of static methods.").
