<category>Tools</category>

# Replica

Replica is the build script for RedBeanPHP. The _all-in-one package_ on the homepage has been
built using Replica.

Using Replica you can build your own all-in-one PHP file. Replica reads the **replica.xml**
file which contains a list of files to be added to the _rb-file_. The
_R-facade class_ is dynamically
generated by Replica.

This is what a line in the **replica.xml** file looks like:

<?php code('
<item type="php">RedBean/Logger.php</item>
');?>

This line will instruct Replica to add the PHP file **RedBean/Logger.php** to the
package.

To run replica type:

<kbd>
php replica.php
</kbd>

Replica will tell you which files are included in the build:

<kbd>
Adding: RedBean/license.txt
</kbd>

Afterwards, you will find the all-in-one file in your directory:

<kbd>
rb.php
</kbd>

## Flavours (version 3.3+)

It's possible to not generate just one but several all-in-one packages, all containing
different collections of php files. These additional versions are called flavours. To add
a php file to a 'flavour' called 'oci' we can use:

<?php code('
<item type="php" flavour="oci">RedBean/QueryWriter/Oracle.php</item>
');?>

This line will add the Oracle driver to the **rboci.php** file. This file has the same
contents as **rb.php** but with the addition of the Oracle.php file.

Replica will report about flavour specific items:

<kbd>
Adding: RedBean/QueryWriter/Oracle.php to flavour: oci
</kbd>

And after running Replica you will see two builds in your directory:

<kbd>
rb.php

rboci.php
</kbd>

## Replica and Plugins (version 3.3+)

Plugins can add static methods to the R facade class. To do so, a plugin has to add
a comment containing the **@plugin** section. What comes after the word **@plugin**
will be inserted into the _R-facade class_.

For instance, consider the imaginary plugin _'CSVImport'_. If we add the line:

<?php code('
// @plugin public static function CSV($file){ ... }
');?>

And we include an entry to the XML configuration:

<?php code('
<item type="php" >RedBean/Plugins/CSVImport.php</item>
');?>

then we can now use the method:

<?php code('
$beans = R::CSV($file);
');?>

Which allows us to dynamically add methods to the _R-facade class_.

# BeanCan Server

BeanCan is a PHP class that can act as a backend server for **Javascript** centered web applications
(**JSON-RPC 2.0** compliant). In a JS based web application your views and controllers are written in client-side Javascript while your
[models](/models_and_fuse "Models and FUSE") are still stored on the server.
BeanCan acts as bridge between the client side javascript views and controllers on the one hand and the server side models on the other.

BeanCan makes use of [FUSE](/models_and_fuse "What is FUSE?"). This means that you can send 4 types of commands to the BeanCan Server:

<table>
<thead>
	<tr>
		<th>Command:</th>
	</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
	<tr><td>load</td></tr>
	<tr><td>export (since 3.3)</td></tr>

	<tr><td>store</td></tr>
	<tr><td>trash</td></tr>
	<tr><td>custom </td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Requests **1-5** are handled automatically by RedBeanPHP.
This means you can **store/delete/load** any bean automatically if you connect to the bean server without ***any*** effort.
If you send an unrecognized command, FUSE tries to locate the model and passes the request. Time for examples...

From version 3.3 on you can use 'export'. Export works the same as 'load' but returns an entire bean hierarchy instead of just
one bean.
<p>
**Request #1:** The following request returns a page with ID 1:

<?php jcode('
{
"jsonrpc":"2.0",
"method":"page:load",
"params":[1],
"id":"myrequestid"
}
');?>

**Request #2:** The following request creates a new page and returns its new ID:

<?php jcode('
{
"jsonrpc":"2.0",
"method":"page:store",
"params":[{"body":"lorem ipsum"}],
"id":"myrequestid"
}
');?>

**Request #3:** The following request changes the text of page 2:

<?php jcode('
{
"jsonrpc":"2.0",
"method":"page:store",
"params":[{"body":"welcome","id":2}],
"id":"myrequestid"
}
');?>

**Request #4:** This example request deletes page with ID 3:

<?php jcode('
{
"jsonrpc":"2.0",
"method":"page:trash",
"params":[3],
"id":"myrequestid"
}
');?>

**Request #5:** executes **$page-&gt;mayAccess( $ip )** and returns the result. FUSE will connect automatically to the Model_Page class to accomplish this.

<?php jcode('
{
"jsonrpc":"2.0",
"method":"page:mayAccess",
"params":[ ipAddress ],
"id":"myrequestid"
}
');?>

The BeanCan server returns **JSON** reponses like this (created page and returns ID):

<?php jcode('
{
"jsonrpc":"2.0",
"result":"8",
"id":"myrequestid"
}
');?>

In case of an error:

<?php jcode('
{
"jsonrpc":"2.0",
"error":{"code":"-32603","message":"Invalid request"},
"id":"myrequestid"
}
');?>

## Full Example

Here is a full [example](/downloads/beancan.txt "Take a look at this example"). It is a todo list
written in **Javascript** and **PHP** using the BeanCan Server.

## Whitelist

To prevent API users from accessing all beans you can use a white list:

```php
$server->setWhitelist(array(
	'candy' => array('store', 'like')
));
```

This example will only allow you to store candy beans and invoke the custom method 'like'.
Other beans and other methods will not be accessible.
To turn off the white list and allow full access:

```php
$sever->setWhitelist('all');
```

Not familiar with JSON-RPC ? Take a look at: [JSON-RPC specification](http://jsonrpc.org/spec.html "Learn more about JSON-RPC").

# REST server

In RedBeanPHP 3.5 you can use the new Resty BeanCan Server. The Resty BeanCan server
makes it easy to make a REST-like API.
To create a Resty BeanCan Server:

```php
$can = new RedBean_Plugin_BeanCanResty;
```

## Whitelist

The first thing to do is to tell RedBeanPHP what methods are allowed per type.
To allow users to perform GET and POST but not PUT and DELETE actions for books use:

```php
$can->setWhitelist(array(
	'book' => array(
		'GET', 'POST'
	)
));
```

For testing purposes, you might want to allow everything:

```php
$can->setWhitelist('all');
```

## GET request

The Resty BeanCan Server works with a reference bean. For instance a $user.
To access or modify a resource you simply pass the path relative to the user and you pass the
(HTTP) method:

```php
$can->handleREST($user, 'book/2', 'GET');
//returns array('result' => array( $property => $value ) )
```

This will retrieve the own list of the $user and load the book with ID 2. Note that this method will
fail if no such book exists in the list. By default, the Resty Can searches in the own list, to search
in the shared list, prefix your list with 'shared-':

```php
$can->handleREST($user, 'site/3/page/4/shared-ad/2', 'GET');
```

This will retrieve ad 2 on page 4 of site 3.

## PUT request

To add a new page:

```php
$can->handleREST($user, 'site/3/page', 'PUT', array(
	'bean' => array(
		'title' => 'my new page'
	)
)); //returns array('result'=>array('id' => 1))
```

## POST request

To update page 4:

```php
$can->handleREST($user, 'site/3/page/4', 'POST', array(
	'bean' => array(
		'title' => 'changed title'
	)
));
```

## DELETE request

To delete page 4:

```php
$can->handleREST($user, 'site/3/page/4', 'DELETE');
```

## GET request for lists

<p>
To get a list of pages:

```php
$can->setWhitelist(array('page'=>'GET')); //you need access to PAGE!
$can->handleREST($user, 'site/3/page/list', 'GET');
```

You can predefine SQL snippets:

```php
$can->setWhitelist(array('page'=>'GET')); //you need access to PAGE!

$sql = array('page'=>array(
	' page.number > ? ', array(3)
));

//for shared pages use 'shared-page' as key!

$can->handleREST($user, 'site/3/page/list', 'GET', array(), $sql);
```

## Custom requests

The BeanCan server also accepts non-rest methods, these will invoke methods on
models connected to beans (FUSE):

```php
$resp = $can->handleREST($user,
	'site/'.$site->id.'/page/'.$page->id,
	'mail', array('param'=>array('me')));

//calls $page->mail('me');
```

## Return values

The handleRest() method returns
an array with an error key or a result key. This allows you to do
your own post-processing, i.e. convert to JSON or XML.
If an error occurs, you get an array like this:

```php
array(
	'error'=> message,
	'code' => code
)
```

If you want to return beans in a custom REST method, use
[R::beansToArray()](/import_and_export#toarray "Returning beans as an array in REST server.").

## Error Codes

The error codes in the response array conform to HTTP error codes:
exceptions generate a 500 code, if the bean is not on the whitelist
you get a 403 code, if the bean cannot be found you get a 404 code other
errors (syntax) return a 400 code.

Don't forget to configure the [whitelist](/beancan_server#whitelist "Learn about the whitelist for all BeanCan Servers.")!

## Legacy REST Server (only get)

This server is now deprecated.
In RedBeanPHP 3.0 the BeanCan server also responds to RESTFul GET requests. To setup a REST server
with beancan:

```php
$server = new RedBean_BeanCan();
$server->handleRESTGetRequest('/book/2'); //returns book with ID 2
$server->handleRESTGetRequest('/book'); //returns books
");

?>

# Namespacer

I don't like PHP namespaces, they have some issues. This [article](http://pornel.net/phpns/ "PHP namespaces are flawed.") by
'Pornel' explains why. There are several reasons why I don't use namespaces in RedBeanPHP:

*   I want RedBeanPHP to be compatible with PHP 5.2 (and sort of compatible with PHP 5.1)
*   I dont want to bother RedBeanPHP users with namespaces, the one-character R::doSomething() formula is quite powerful
*   While I admire the work of the PHP core development team, I feel choosing the '\' symbol was a mistake, it's like introducing **DOS** in **PHP**

Also, I really like **Poorman's namespacing**. In fact, it does the same job as
namespacing... with **no additional syntax**. I **really** like that. _The less syntax the better_.

## Namespacer Script

For those of you who insist on using namespaces,
I have written a small PHP script
for you to _dynamically_ put RedBeanPHP in a namespace:

[Namespace Script](http://www.redbeanphp.com/downloads/namespace.tar.gz "namespacer").

Usage:

<kbd>
php space.php MyNameSpaceForBeans
</kbd>

The command above will put the entire RedBeanPHP library in the
'MyNameSpaceForBeans' namespace. The namespace script will put the resulting PHP code in a file called:

<kbd>
rbn.php
</kbd>

This filename stands for: **R**ed**B**eanPHP with **Namespaces**.
After running this script and including the freshly generated _rbn.php_ file, you can use
the namespaced RedBeanPHP version:

For instance: **R::store** becomes **\MyNameSpaceForBeans\R::store**.

Happy namespacing... ;)

# RedUNIT

**RedBeanPHP** has been tested very well. You can find the test files on github.
The complete set of test files for RedBeanPHP is called RedUNIT. RedBeanPHP has been tested
with PHP Coverage. With version 3.0 RedBeanPHP has reached **99%** test coverage.

To run a unit test pack, type the following command in testing/cli:

<kbd>
./start.sh
</kbd>

This will run the tests. To run all mysql tests (same for Postgres,Sqlite):

<kbd>
./start.sh Mysql
</kbd>

To run a single test package:

<kbd>
./start.sh Base/Graph
</kbd>

Before you run tests yourself you might want to take a look at the
test configuration file config/test.ini

# News Archive

Old news is no news... but for the sake of archiving...

## What happened in before...

<time>2013-06-30</time>: [Improved](https://github.com/gabordemooij/redbean/commit/0205fa8323d2e228dcc4da2dda410921e8be03cd "New N-M bean relation system") retrieval of shared beans so you filter/order by links.

<time>2013-06-23</time>: [Sneak preview](https://github.com/gabordemooij/redbean/commit/dbad985e1cd89bb3ab0e43f6c4846ac37b9f2634 "Take a look at the new count methods in RedBeanPHP 3.5!") of relation counts in RedBeanPHP 3.5!

<time>2013-06-12</time>: Released [version 3.4.7](/changelog "Read changelog") (minor fixes).

<time>2013-05-23</time>: Re-added getProperties method in OODBBean.

<time>2013-05-22</time>: Have been interviewed by [UserError](http://usererror.fi/2013/05/cleaning-up-your-crud/ "Cleaning up your CRUD...").

<time>2013-05-15</time>: Released RedBeanPHP 3.4.5 Minor fix in [isChanged()](https://github.com/saetia/redbean/commit/8139ddc19b3d93468ad164695df68a291a867b25 "View issue on Github").

<time>2013-05-09</time>: Released RedBeanPHP 3.4.4 updated [connect()](https://github.com/gabordemooij/redbean/issues/262 "View details on Github") method to send along proper error code.

<time>2013-05-05</time>: First draft of [BeanCan 2](https://github.com/gabordemooij/redbean/commit/ade919e616e2a745f921b81d71f248b9cf73ee1b "Discover the new RESTful BeanCan server") available on Github.

<time>2013-04-29</time>: RedBeanPHP 3.4.3 fixed issue in internal stash cache.

<time>2013-04-11</time>: RedBeanPHP 3.4.2 fixed a typo

<time>2013-04-05</time>: RedBeanPHP 3.4.1 has been released; added [minor feature](/eager_loading#sql "SQL in Eager Loading").

<time>2013-04-01</time>: RedBeanPHP 3.4 has been released. See [changelog](/changelog "Explore RedBeanPHP 3.4") for details.

<time>2013-03-01</time>: We are currently [beta](/beta_testing "beta") testing RedBeanPHP 3.4. Help us test the new release of RedBeanPHP.

# Old Manuals

Old manuals can be found here:

*   [Previous Additional Manual 3.3](/extra)
*   [Manual RB 2.0](/manual2_0)
*   [Manual RB 1.0](http://redbeanphp.com/community/wiki/index.php?title=Main_Page "Main_Page")
